Hello Guys welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
Today we're going to talk about the constant rules.
Believe it or not the constant rule is the easiest differentiation rule there is.
It is so easy.
Your mind is going to be blown away just like that.
All right.
So what is a constant rule and what does it used for.
So in business calculus the constant rule is just to find the derivative of constant functions.
You might be asking yourself OK so what is a constant function.
Well let's cover that quickly before we get to the constant rule.
All right.
So
constant
functions.
So when you think of the word constant What comes to mind.
Well constant means that something is not changing right.
So what would a constant function look like.
Well for example let's take the function f of x equals 10.
And now that we have the function of x equals 10.
Let's try plugging in some values into AB of x.
So what if we have half of 1 What does that equal to.
Well you know typically when you evaluate a value at a function you plug it in right here to see what
you get.
However in this case we don't have any axes.
So there's nothing really to plug in.
That means that half of 1 is just 10.
Let's try a different value.
What if we try plugging in seven.
So we want to find half of seven.
Well again there's nothing really there for you to plug in.
So again the value is going to be 10.
And I hope you're seeing a pattern here.
Every one is 10 F of 7 is 10.
All right.
Just to be really outrageous let's try a really big number.
Something like negative 20 2000.
So we're going to plug in negative 22000 into this function f of x equals 10.
Well again because it's only 10.
We go back to the same thing.
Half of negative 22000 equals 10.
So what's going on here.
Well one equals ten of seven equals 10 of negative 22000 equals 10 basically what ever number you plug
in into f of x equals 10 you're going to get the same answer 10.
Doesn't matter if it's positive.
Does it matter if you plug in in a negative number.
It doesn't matter if you plug it in zero.
In fact I have a zero also equals 10 What does that mean.
That means that f of x is a constant function because it doesn't matter what the x value is.
Why is always the same.
So let's go to the definition of a constant function.
Ok so here we have a more formal definition which is a constant function is a function whose y value
is always the same.
So remember how we had f of x equals 10 Well again let's get a couple of points for this function.
So we had said for example that a point would be 710.
So when the x value is 7 the y value is 10.
We also tried negative 22000 Oh you know what.
I'll remove the comma here because you got my get confusing.
So that's going to be negative 22000.
And again the y value is also 10.
And again it doesn't matter which number you plug in.
Again you're always going to have 10 as a Y value.
Again if we plug in zero we also get 10.
So basically again a constant function is a function whose y value is always the same.
It doesn't change.
In this case it is always 10.
So how do we know what we're dealing with a constant function.
Well it's actually very easy.
Our constant function is a function where the f of x is equal to a number so if f of x is equal to a
number
then you know you're dealing with a constant function.
All right.
In this case that we had here a vaccine was 10 effectively ever x is equal to a number.
Therefore it is a constant function.
Another example of a constant function would be of X equals negative to half of X equals 10000
f of x equals
etc. etc. you get the point.
Let me just market for you that these are examples of constant functions.
All right.
So one last time a constant function is a function whose y value is always the same.
It does not matter what you plug in and you recognize constant functions because they're equal to a
number.
No axes no letters just a number.
So now that we know what a constant function is we're going to go into the constant rule.
So the constant rule is a way to find the derivative of constant functions.
OK so before we get into the constant rule let's try graphing a constant function so that we can then
jump into the concert rule because are both related.
OK so let's say we have the function f of x equals 2.
Again we know it is a constant function.
So let's try and graph that
OK so to graph it we need to find a couple of points in the function right.
So again is a constant function so whatever you plug in is going to give you the same answer.
It's always going to be two.
So let's try plugging in one.
Pick easy numbers and let's try plugging in negative 3 which also equals two let's read a graph of that
here.
So
first point would be one comma two and second one would be two comma.
I'm sorry the second one is going to be negative three.
Comma 2 OK.
So let's try to find where this point.
One two is to remember which one is the x value the Y the two is a Y value.
So we have we move one to the right that is x value and then two up which would be or Y value.
First point would be right here.
Second point you have to move three to the left because it's negative 3 and then go up by 2.
So we do one two three two to the left and then we go up by two which would be right here.
So what happens.
Well we have two points.
We can now connect them together and we'll get the graph of a function
right as opposed to be a straight line but you know my drawing is not perfect so it looks a little weird.
But again it's just a straight line.
So we know that the graph of this function is just a straight line.
Not only that it is a horizontal line.
Why is it horizontal.
Well remember that every y value is always the same.
That means that it doesn't matter if you move to the right or to the left.
It's always going to be at the same height.
Right.
It's always going to be a 2.
For that reason the graphs of constant functions are always horizontal lines
drives of constant functions
I'll abbreviate function as F and just the save is a little bit of time are always
a horizontal line that is absolutely always true.
All right
doesn't matter what the function is.
What really changes is just the height over the line is.
So you could have like a different function over here.
Bit like that.
This could be like f of x equals 10.
You could also have another function down here.
Which could be f of x equals let's say negative 6 something like that.
So again it's always a horizontal line.
What really changes is the height of the line which is based on this number over here.
That would be f of x equals whatever number the constant function is equal to.
Now that said remember that a derivative measures rate of change how a function is changing.
Right.
A derivative is a slope.
So what it really measures is the slope of a line touching the graph at a certain point.
However you know that slope is rise over run.
In this case do we really have a rise.
I mean if you look at this it's basically a straight line horizontal.
It's now going up.
It's now going down as is going to the right.
So there's no slope here because there's no rice right.
Remember that slope is by the way remember the sign of a slope is an M let me point that out here slope
equals equals Rice overrun.
But for a constant function there's no rice means that the rice is equal to zero.
And the run doesn't really matter.
Right.
Let's say it's 2 0 over 2 is still zero.
What does that mean.
Well let's look into the definition of the constant rule and see what this means.
OK so now we have the formal definition of a constant rule because the rule says that the derivative
of a constant function is 0.
Again the derivative of a constant function is 0 that is always that is always absolutely always the
case.
So any you're dealing with a constant function such as half of X equals 10 which is the one we're working
with it's derivative is always going to be zero.
The function is f of x equals negative 2.
Again we know it's a constant function.
No letters are read here.
That means it's derivative is always going to be zero.
Why last example.
F of x equals zero which believe it or not.
It's actually a constant function as well even though it is 0.
Well by definition it's still a number with no letters.
Therefore it's derivative.
It's always going to be zero.
So there you have it the derivative of a constant function is 0.
That's always the case.
And again we know this because of what we talked about a couple of minutes ago.
Basically the graph of a constant function is always a horizontal line.
For example the graph of X equals negative two is something like this.
Because it doesn't matter which number you plug in for x doesn't matter how much you go to the right
or to the left.
The height of the function is always going to be at negative 2.
So again like I said before the derivative measures rate of change.
How is a function changing.
Well this function is not changing at all.
It's always negative to therefore its derivative is zero.
In other words there's no slope there's no rise overrun.
And because of that it's derivative it's always going to be zero.
So anytime you see a function that looks like this you know f of x equals a number.
You have a constant function and the derivative of that is always zero.
That's it's for the constant function.
I told you it was going to be extremely easy.
All right.
Just remember derivative of a constant function is 0.
Now we're going to go into the mnemonic for this concept.
OK.
So the mnemonic for the constant rule and again it's a very easy rule to remember but I'm putting on
and want it here in case you want to think about it that way.
Let's say that you turn on the TV and they say that the weather tomorrow in your city will have constant
temperature.
Well if the weather has constant temperature that means that the change in temperature is zero.
In other words the temperatures not going to change.
Right.
So when you're thinking about costs and functions all you have to think about is ok constant the word
constant means that it's not changing.
So if you have a constant function the change in temperature is zero.
Therefore the derivative of a constant function is zero.
So let's say you have going back to our example of X equals 10.
This is a constant function.
So again think about the word constant.
Well constant could be constant temperature.
And when that happens when you have constant temperature the change in temperature is zero.
Therefore the derivative of a constant function is always zero.
Right.
So let's go over what we just covered.
Again we cover a constant functions and the constant rule.
So first of all a constant function is a function in the form of X equals C C is a number.
So I know we just said that constant functions do not have letters.
But see here is a placeholder for any number.
OK so when we say F of facts equals see where Seiza number.
It can mean that C is equal to 10.
It means that C could be equal to 5 c it could be close to negative 22000 etc..
Again what this is saying is that if a VAX is equal so number then that is a constant function.
Second point pretty much says the same thing.
You can tell that a constant function apart because of x is equal to a number.
No letters.
Then we have the graph of a constant function is always a horizontal straight line.
No slope.
We said that this is the case because the height is always the same.
There's no slope because there is no rise.
You're not either going up nor down you're just moving left to right.
And finally we have the constant rule which says that the derivative of a constant function is always
zero.
OK so this is pretty much it for constant rule and constant functions as always.
If you have any questions please do not hesitate to ask in the forum for the course and I'll see you
in the next tutorial of.